.. _quick_start_fitting:

Fitting an Absorption Spectrum
==============================
.. sectionauthor:: Hilary Egan <hilary.egan@colorado.edu>

This tool can be used to fit absorption spectra, particularly those
generated using the (``AbsorptionSpectrum``) tool. For more details
on its uses and implementation please see (`Egan et al. (2013)
<http://arxiv.org/abs/1307.2244>`_). If you find this tool useful we 
encourage you to cite accordingly.


Loading an Absorption Spectrum
------------------------------

To load an absorption spectrum created by (``AbsorptionSpectrum``), 
we specify the output file name. It is advisable to use either an .h5
or .fits file, rather than an ascii file to save the spectrum as rounding
errors produced in saving to a ascii file will negatively impact fit quality.

.. code-block:: python

    f = h5py.File('spectrum.h5')
    wavelength = f["wavelength"][:]
    flux = f['flux'][:]
    f.close()

Specifying Species Properties
-----------------------------

Before fitting a spectrum, you must specify the properties of all the 
species included when generating the spectrum.

The physical properties needed for each species are the rest wavelength,
f-value, gamma value, and atomic mass. These will be the same values
as used to generate the initial absorption spectrum. These values are
given in list form as some species generate multiple lines (as in the
OVI doublet). The number of lines is also specified on its own.

To fine tune the fitting procedure and give results in a minimal
number of optimizing steps, we specify expected maximum and minimum
values for the column density, doppler parameter, and redshift. These 
values can be well outside the range of expected values for a typical line
and are mostly to prevent the algorithm from fitting to negative values
or becoming numerically unstable.

Common initial guesses for doppler parameter and column density should also
be given. These values will not affect the specific values generated by
the fitting algorithm, provided they are in a reasonably appropriate range
(ie: within the range given by the max and min values for the parameter).

For a spectrum containing both the H Lyman-alpha line and the OVI doublet,
we set up a fit as shown below.

.. code-block:: python

    HI_parameters = {'name':'HI',
            'f': [.4164],
            'Gamma':[6.265E8],
            'wavelength':[1215.67],
            'numLines':1,
            'maxN': 1E22, 'minN':1E11,
            'maxb': 300, 'minb':1,
            'maxz': 6, 'minz':0,
            'init_b':30,
            'init_N':1E14}

    OVI_parameters = {'name':'OVI',
            'f':[.1325,.06580],
            'Gamma':[4.148E8,4.076E8],
            'wavelength':[1031.9261,1037.6167],
            'numLines':2,
            'maxN':1E17,'minN':1E11,
            'maxb':300, 'minb':1,
            'maxz':6, 'minz':0,
            'init_b':20,
            'init_N':1E12}

    speciesDicts = {'HI':HI_parameters,'OVI':OVI_parameters}


Generating Fit of Spectrum
--------------------------

After loading a spectrum and specifying the properties of the species
used to generate the spectrum, an apporpriate fit can be generated. 

.. code-block:: python

    orderFits = ['OVI','HI']

    fitted_lines, fitted_flux = generate_total_fit(wavelength,
        flux, orderFits, speciesDicts)

The orderFits variable is used to determine in what order the species
should be fitted. This may affect the results of the resulting fit,
as lines may be fit as an incorrect species. For best results, it is
recommended to fit species the generate multiple lines first, as a fit
will only be accepted if all of the lines are fit appropriately using
a single set of parameters. At the moment no cross correlation between
lines of different species is performed. 

The parameters of the lines that are needed to fit the spectrum are contained 
in the **fitted_lines** variable. Each species given in **orderFits** will
be a key in the **fitted_lines** dictionary. The entry for each species 
key will be another dictionary containing entries for 'N','b','z', and 
'group#' which are the column density, doppler parameter, redshift,
and associate line complex respectively. The i :superscript:`th` line 
of a given species is then given by the parameters **N[i]**, **b[i]**, 
and **z[i]** and is part of the same complex (and was fitted at the same time)
as all lines with the same group number as **group#[i]**.

The **fitted_flux** is an ndarray of the same size as **flux** and 
**wavelength** that contains the cummulative absorption spectrum generated 
by the lines contained in **fitted_lines**.

Saving a Spectrum Fit
---------------------

Saving the results of a fitted spectrum for further analysis is
accomplished automatically using the h5 file format. A group
is made for each species that is fit, and each species group has
a group for the corresponding N, b, z, and group# values.


